
## Risk-taking in free-living spotted hyenas is associated with anthropogenic disturbance, predicts survivorship, and is consistent across experimental contexts

[![DOI](https://zenodo.org/badge/208072601.svg)](https://zenodo.org/badge/latestdoi/208072601)

  - Authors:
      - [Julie W. Turner](https://www.julwturner.com)
      - Rebecca M. LaFleur
      - Allie T. Richardson
      - [Kay E. Holekamp](https://www.holekamplab.org)

This repository contains the data and code accompanying the paper
“Risk-taking in free-living spotted hyenas is associated with
anthropogenic disturbance, predicts survivorship, and is consistent
across experimental contexts”.

## Abstract

Anthropogenic disturbance can have important influences on the fitness
and behaviors of wild animals, including their boldness when exposed to
risky conditions. We presented spotted hyenas (Crocuta crocuta) from two
populations, each exposed to a different level of human activity, with a
life-size model hyena representing an intruder from another clan. The
high-disturbance population lived adjacent to human settlements and the
low-disturbance population inhabited a relatively undisturbed part of
the same national park in Kenya. The mock intruder was presented to
individual hyenas to assess their reactions to an alien hyena, and to
determine whether their reactions varied with their exposure to
anthropogenic activity. We found that human disturbance was indeed
associated with hyena risk-taking behavior in response to the model
intruder. Hyenas tested in the low-disturbance area exhibited more
risk-taking behaviors by approaching the mock intruder more closely, and
spending more time near it, than did their counterparts living in
high-disturbance areas. Hyenas that spent less time in close proximity
to the model had greater survivorship than those that spent more time in
close proximity to it, regardless of disturbance level. Furthermore, the
individual differences in risk-taking measured here were consistent with
those obtained previously from the same animals using a different set of
experimental manipulations. However, the experimentally induced
behaviors were not consistent with naturally-occurring risk-taking
behaviors in proximity to lions; this suggests that risk-taking
behaviors are consistent within individuals across experimental
contexts, but that exposure to lions elicits different responses.
Although our results are consistent with those from earlier tests of
anthropogenic disturbance and boldness in spotted hyenas and other
predators, they differ from results obtained from birds and small
mammals, which are generally found to be bolder in areas characterized
by human disturbance.
